So, what is the takeaway point up to this time?
I'm sure we got the point.
It's hoped us to think about our loving Heavenly Father,
Jehovah, as the merciful judge of the entire earth
and His Son, Jesus Christ.
Yes, we can trust them to make proper judgments.
We know that Jehovah and Jesus can read hearts,
and they have a long record of living
by the perfect standards of justice
that Jehovah has set up.
So, what about the future judgments
during the Great Tribulation?
Is there something that we can adjust
with regard to our understanding?
Well, before we start to do that, let's be quite frank.
Over the last few years, we've had a few changes
with regard to the events that occurred
during the Great Tribulation.
And if you've been in the truth for a while,
sometimes it's a bit hard to remember,
was that what we used to believe, or is this what we believe now?
So, to help us to make sure that we've got some idea
of some of the events that occur during the Great Tribulation,
let's look at this review.
What event starts the Great Tribulation?
The destruction of battle on the Great.
That will be the time when the political powers
turn on the world empire of false religion,
showing their disgust for this symbolic prostitute.
This will lead to the destruction
of all false religious organizations.
What event ends the Great Tribulation?
The Battle of Armageddon.
That will be the final part of the Great Tribulation.
Jesus, along with the resurrected 144,000
and myriads of angels, will battle
with all those who opposed Jehovah, his kingdom,
and his people here on earth.
This will be the war of the great day of God, the Almighty.
Now that we have the start,
and the end of the Great Tribulation in mind,
let's ask a few more questions.
How long will that time period be from start to finish?
The answer is, we don't know.
We do know that many events are foretold
to happen during that time period,
but these events may all occur
in a reasonably short period of time.
For this discussion though,
let's focus on the few events that will occur
toward the end of the Great Tribulation.
When does the attack of Gogov May Gog occur?
It doesn't occur at the beginning of the Great Tribulation,
but toward the end of that period of time.
This attack on God's people by a coalition of nations
will lead right into the Battle of Armageddon.
So Gog's attack will occur just prior to Armageddon.
When will the remaining ones of the anointed
be gathered and taken to heaven?
The Bible book of Ezekiel indicates
that when Gogov May Gog starts his attack,
some of the anointed will still be here on earth.
However, Revelation 1714 tells us
that when Jesus battles with the nations,
he will come with those who are called and chosen.
That is, all of the resurrected 144,000.
So the final gathering of his chosen ones must occur
after the start of the attack of Gogov May Gog
and before the Battle of Armageddon.
This means that the anointed will be gathered
and taken to heaven toward the end of the Great Tribulation,
not at the beginning.
When will the final judgment of the sheep
and the goats take place?
Again, although we can't be dogmatic
as to the exact sequence of events,
it appears that the final judgment takes place
at the end of the Great Tribulation, not at the beginning.
That will be the time when the son of man comes
in his glory and all his angels with him.
Of course, there are a lot of other events
that are foretold to happen during this time period.
But for now, let's just focus on these few events,
all of which will happen just before the outbreak of Armageddon.
What do we learn from them?
First, Jesus' judgment of the sheep and the goats
and the destruction of the wicked
will take place at the end of the Great Tribulation.
Second, there will be some of the remaining ones
of the anointed on earth
until the start of the attack of Gog of May Gogh
right at the end of the Great Tribulation.
Third, the judgment of the sheep and the goats
will include their dealings with Christ's brothers
even during the Great Tribulation.
So that is a review of what we already believe.
So if you are writing down notes of this and you point,
be careful what you say to others.
But how do these basic facts,
when we look at the things that occurred
toward the end of the Great Tribulation,
how do they affect our understanding
of Jehovah's judgments by means of Jesus Christ?
Well, we know that the closer we get to the Great Tribulation,
the clearer our understanding is of what will occur.
Yes, our understanding is clarified according
to the proper time and also in a way that will help us
not only to endure the Great Tribulation,
but also to prosper during that period of time.
So what we're going to do is consider
four very interesting questions.
Yes, and I've got some time left.
The first question is, once the Great Tribulation starts,
so we saw there in the chart
with the destruction of battle on the Great.
So once it starts, is there a door of opportunity
for non-believers to actually join us in serving Jehovah?
Is there a door of opportunity?
What have we said in the past?
We've said, no, there will not be an opportunity
for people to join us at that time.
Now, why did we say that?
Well, basically, we viewed the account of the flood
as being a type and anti-type portrayal
and that we thought the fact that the door of the ark
was closed prior to the flood coming,
indicated that the door of opportunity would close
once the Great Tribulation started.
But, of course, it's true Jesus did compare
the time of Noah with the presence of him as a reigning king.
But notice Jesus didn't say anything that indicated
this was a type, anti-type arrangement
and he certainly didn't mention anything
with regard to a door of opportunity closing.
So let's think about that question again.
Once the Great Tribulation starts,
is there a door of opportunity still available?
Well, to answer that, looking at this time chart,
remember the judgment of the sheep and the goats,
the final judgment occurs when,
not at the beginning, but towards the end of the Great Tribulation.
So let's think about some that we know.
Perhaps, I'm believing relatives, disfellowshipped ones,
others that have heard the message,
perhaps studied with us,
could some of them, once they see the destruction
of Babylon the Great decide that what your hovers' witnesses
were saying is correct after all,
could they take a stand for the truth?
Well, if they changed their hearts and joined us,
would we be disappointed?
Now we can't be dogmatic.
But we don't want to be like Jonah.
And so, oh, no, the door's closed, no, no, no.
You see, we need to remember other cases
in the scriptures that help us to understand
how Jehovah as a merciful judge
has dealt with people in the past.
For example, think about the Israelites when they left Egypt.
Please, if you'd turn with me to Exodus chapter 12,
Exodus chapter 12, and we're going to read
the first part of verse 38.
So here is describing the Exodus.
And Exodus 12, 38 says,
and a vast mixed company also went with them.
Now, do you notice there's a footnote there
and what does it say?
That is, a mixed company of non-Isolites,
including Egyptians.
So what happened?
Well, during the time when the 10 complaints came
upon the Egyptians, obviously some of these Egyptians
started to see the distinction between Jehovah
and the false gods that they worshiped.
So when decision time came,
and Israelites were leaving Egypt,
some of these Egyptians joined the Israelites.
And that isn't that interesting for us to know.
But of course, we might be thinking, yes, well,
I understand why we said what we did before,
but is it really the case that all these ones
that we've stated with or so on,
some of them may have a chance to join us
after Babylon the Great is destroyed?
Is that fair?
Last minute repentance.
But you see, are we imitating the merciful judge
of all the earth?
Really, we shouldn't be surprised
if that were to happen, should we?
And think about it.
As we looked in the time chart,
we saw that this is a time period prior
to the final judgment.
So anyone who takes their stand for Jehovah
early in the Great Tribulation will still face
the attack of Gog of May Gog,
and that will be a very, very difficult time.
But now what do we need to note with regard
to this, well, just as in the first century in 66 CE,
decision time came, and many decided to go
and leave Jerusalem at that point.
Now, they made their decision based on what they already knew
and had heard.
So in a similar way, our preaching work today
is of utmost importance.
But let's notice what the Apostle Paul said
is recorded in the book of Romans.
Romans chapter 10 and verses 13 and 14.
And as we read this, think about the context
of what we're talking about when battle on the Great
is destroyed.
So the time prior to that, see, it says in verse 13,
for everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.
However, how will they call on him
if they have not put faith in him?
How in turn will they put faith in him
about whom they have not heard?
How in turn will they hear without someone to preach?
Do you see why our preaching work is so urgent
and important today?
Yes, many take the opportunity to make a decision right now.
But could it be that once the Great Tribulation starts,
many who have heard the message
that Jehovah's Witnesses have preached,
may be in a position then to make the right decision,
the right choice.
Well, again, we can't be dogmatic,
but we certainly hope that that would be the case.
Now, while we're talking about this,
let's talk about the elephant in the room.
What do we mean?
Well, you know, some of us in the past,
we're not going to mention names.
But you know, some of us have said,
oh, you know, my unbelieving relative,
or, you know, I hope he dies before the Great Tribulation.
Uh-huh, we know what you'd be saying.
You said, because if he dies before the Great Tribulation,
he'll have a chance of a resurrection.
But during, mm-mm.
But let's think about that.
You see, does someone's eternal salvation
depend on when they die?
Or does it depend on really their heart condition?
You see, the merciful judge of the earth
knows their heart condition.
And really, what are we thinking if we ask that question?
You know, we imagine Jehovah saying to Jesus,
look at this person, you know,
they really should die forever.
But look at it, they died now
before the Great Tribulation.
Oh, now we have to resurrect them.
I mean, really?
Jehovah is the righteous, merciful judge.
He knows people's hearts.
He can't fool him or trick him.
So that was the first question.
I'm sure you found interesting, yeah?
Once the Great Tribulation starts,
does the door of opportunity pose?
The answer is, well, we'll have to wait and see,
but according to the scriptures,
it is a possibility that some can make a stand for the truth.
Second question, when does the preaching
of the good news of the kingdom finish?
Good question.
First start, let's remember,
the good news is only good news to us
and those who accept it.
As Psalm two mentions over the rest of the world,
it's never been good news, hasn't.
So what does Matthew 2414 tell us?
It tells us that the good news is going to be preached
and then the end will come.
Let's look at that timeline again.
What is the end referred to there?
Well, it's the final part of the Great Tribulation.
So that means that during the Great Tribulation,
the good news of the kingdom will still be preached
and it's still good news to us,
but not to the rest of the world.
That good news will become more hard hitting
as time goes on, causing people to make a decision
one way or the other, whether they accept the kingdom or not.
So isn't that yet another reason why we shouldn't be surprised
that some may make a stand for the truth
even during the Great Tribulation?
The third question.
All those who die during the Great Tribulation,
will they go into eternal death and never be resurrected?
Well, initially we can say the goats,
they're not going to be resurrected, are they?
Because they're going to everlasting cutting off
according to what Jesus said.
And in 2nd Thessalonians chapter one,
it speaks of the punishment of everlasting destruction
being meted out.
But what time period are we talking about?
Well, let's look at our timeline again.
You see, this is referring to the time
when Jesus comes with his holy ones.
So looking at our timeline, what does it show us?
That this is at the very end of the Great Tribulation.
When people are judged as being goats,
specifically they have been given this judgment.
But there are some other questions that come up.
You see, these ones who are judged as goats,
those who receive everlasting destruction,
obviously have had adequate opportunity,
have had a full opportunity to accept or reject the kingdom.
But what about those prior to that final judgment?
So the Great Tribulation starts,
we're not sure how long it goes,
but each day that goes on,
this people who no doubt will die.
Do you realize every day worldwide,
about 150,000 people die,
either of natural causes, of wars, sicknesses, and so on?
So what about those ones?
They're not actually killed by Jehovah as a punishment.
So what do we need to remember?
The merciful judge knows who should be resurrected
and who shouldn't be resurrected.
So we can't be dogmatic about those ones
who may die at that time.
We know that Jehovah and Jesus will do the right thing.
Now, another final interesting question.
Will all those living during the Great Tribulation
have a full opportunity to decide either for the kingdom
or against them?
How would you answer?
Don't say that aloud.
The simple answer is, we don't know.
And we don't need to know,
because we're not the judges.
It's above our pay grade.
But now, there may be a little voice in you saying,
but why don't we know?
I mean, I've always believed during that time, that's it.
But you see, each day,
we mention 150,000 people on average die,
350,000 new babies are born each day.
So even if the Great Tribulation was only a few days long,
each day you've got more babies being born.
And what about areas where the good news hasn't reached
to the greatest extent?
Maybe in lands where our work is restricted,
we might be wondering, well, will we get to preach
to every individual?
Matthew chapter 10 verse 28,
if you look at it later, seems to indicate,
maybe we won't.
So now, here's an interesting question.
Is it reasonable for us to say that
Jehovah and Jesus automatically label millions of people
as goats, even though they have never had a full opportunity
to respond?
Interesting question.
If they haven't had a full opportunity
and they die at that time,
is it possible that they may receive a resurrection
as unrighteous persons?
What's the answer?
We simply don't know.
We can't be dogmatic.
And we shouldn't be dogmatic because we don't know.
But rather, let's take comfort in what we do know
and what do we know?
We know that Jehovah and Jesus are merciful
that they will always do the right thing.
In Ezekiel chapter 33 verse 11,
what does it say, Jehovah?
It takes no delight in the death of a wicked person.
He wants them to change.
And we know that Jehovah and Jesus will judge each individual
in a balanced, righteous, and merciful way.
Well now, at this point, you think,
wow, that's a lot to take in.
Maybe your hands are a little tired from taking notes.
Don't worry.
An upcoming watchtower is going to give us all the details
on this, so stay tuned.
But in the meantime, what do we need to keep doing?
We need to keep preaching the message
to as many people as possible.
We have no idea what results may come from that.
And as we keep on preaching, remember,
leave the judging to Jehovah and Jesus.
They will always do the right thing,
the merciful and just thing of that.
We can be absolutely confident.